---
title: The History of the SACP; it's role in the anti apartheid effort
description: An essay on the South African Communist Party;
pubDate: May 15 2025
heroImage: /src/assets/blogs/SCPThumbnail.jpeg
---
#### *Preface; English; Vocabulary*
- **Means of Production**: The *means of production* refers to the necessary assets and resources that enable a society to engage in production. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Means_of_production#Industrial_production)
- **Proletariat**: [Working-class](https://www.google.com/search?q=working-class) people regarded [collectively](https://www.google.com/search?q=collectively), often used in Marxist contexts.
- **Socialism**: A political and economic theory of social organisation which [advocates](https://www.google.com/search?q=advocates) for the community to own or regulate the means of production, distribution, and exchange.
- **Communism**: A system in which all property is owned by the community, and each person contributes and receives according to their ability and needs.
- [**Tribal Loyalties**](https://library.fiveable.me/key-terms/world-literature-i/tribal-loyalty): Loyalty to one's ethnic or tribal group, often prioritised over national or class unity.
- **Chauvinism**: Excessive or [prejudiced](https://www.google.com/search?q=prejudiced) support for one’s own group, especially male prejudice against women.



#### Section 1: What Is The SACP, A brief history
The SACP *(South African Communist Party)* Is a Far Left Marxist-Leninist political party based in South Africa. It was originally founded on the 12th of February 1921. It was formed by the International Socialist League merging with a collection of other various smaller socialist groups based around South Africa to create the CPSA *(Communist Party of South Africa)* under the leadership of William H. Andrews, who, after the groups conception took the role of the chairman.
In 1950 the CPSA was forced underground due to the Apartheid government implementing the *1950 Suppression Of Communism Act* to prevent the spread of communist ideology throughout South Africa, and to stunt the Anti-apartheid movements that the CPSA and other Communist organisations were commonly associated with, and in some cases even provided funding for. The CPSA going underground is what lead to it's name being changed from the *Communist Party of South Africa* to the *South African Communist Party* as it's known today in its 1953 reconstitution.
On 2nd of February in 1990, when the then president F W. De Klerk announced the unbanning of the SACP the ANC and any other major political parties, it marked a pivotal moment in south African transition from a Undemocratic Apartheid regime to a new, more democratic era in the countries history. The unbanning of political parties ushered in a new era of political discussion and dialogue, Ultimately resulting in the open and democratic 1994 election, which is what directly lead to the collapse of the Apartheid regime in South Africa.


####  Section 2: Ideology And Political Beliefs 
The SACP is a anti-capitalist, Marxist-Leninist group that throughout its lifespan focused itself on ending the exploitation that takes place under capitalism, and well as establishing a socialist republic based on the common ownership of the means of production (MOP). The SACP would devote itself to growing class consciousnesses by educating the proletarian which would help workers gain a better understanding to their relation with the MOP, which would be an important step in converting a, at the time of its inception, a segregated South Africa into a cohesive Socialist Republic where a predominate amount of the power is held by the proletarian. In its early life to the present, the SACP would fight against racism, Tribal Loyalties, Sexual Discrimination, Regionalism, Chauvinism (in particular sexual chauvinism), and all other forms of nationalism

####  Section 3: Their Role In Resisting Apartheid
From the CPSA's 1921 inception, the CPSA treated the fight against racism as a central focus of its political mission, and played an incredibly vital and often understated role in the dissolution of the apartheid regime in South Africa. 
Although at the time of its creation, the CPSA was a predominantly white organisation, it gradually became a sizeable, majority black political organisation, committed heavily to interracial working class unity and national liberation from apartheid. 
After the CPSA's banning under the *1950 Suppression Of Communism Act*, and its subsequent 1953 reconstitution into the SACP, covered briefly in Section One, The CPSA began operating underground alongside the ANC under its new name, South African Communist Party, or SACP to avoid detection by authorities hoping to suppress communist movements throughout South Africa. 
The communists and the newly reconstituted SACP also played a role in drafting the Freedom Charter of 1955, which was a manifesto demanding that land be given to all landless people, shorter work hours for workers, and fair living wages, along with free and compulsory education for all. These demands are not inherently communist, but i believe that they do draw a lot of influence from socialist and Marxist thought. These demands reflect a desire for a more equitable society where basic needs are provided to all people and not only the largely white wealthy groups that were prevalent under apartheid. These align with the anti apartheid effort to grant greater human rights to all, and reduce racial inequality. 
Following the Sharpeville massacre of 1960, it was clear that peaceful anti-apartheid protesting was ineffective against the apartheid government. That lead to the SACP and ANC jointly creating uMkhonto we Sizwe (which translates to Spear of The Nation) in 1961, which was a paramilitary wing of the ANC that opposed the apartheid government by launching various sabotage campaigns aimed at the government throughout South Africa. The uMkhonto we Sizwe was formed in response. The aim of the uMkhonto we Sizwes' sabotage campaigns were never to hurt innocent bystanders, rather damage infrastructure of the apartheid government such as power plants, railways and communication lines, on some occasions bystanders were tragically killed or injured. The most prolific of these being the *Church Street Bombing of 1983* Its goal as to target the South African Air Force headquarters based in Pretoria. The bomb exploded during rush hour as the Headquarters, which left 19 people dead, and over 200 civilian passerby and workers being injured. The sabotage campaigns remain an incredibly contentious topic in apartheid discourse, and while never morally justified, it not only showed MK's willingness and ability to carry out high profile attacks, but it also put the anti apartheid fight on an international stage, which brought international attention to the atrocities under the apartheid regime. The *Church Street Bombing of 1983* was of course not without its downsides. Aside from the tragic loss of life and casualty, the bombing also lead to uMkhonto we Sizwe and the ANC being labelled as terrorist organisations, which undermined the moral high ground they had from protesting apartheid. The ANC did later express remorse and regret over the loss of lives due to the attack, and recognised the negative impact of the bombings on their reputation.
At the peak of apartheid, the SACP operated for the most part in exile, concentration on building global networks and receiving support from other socialist states such as the USSR, East Germany, Cuba, and others. 
The SACP helped redefine Marxist theory to suite the conditions faced in South Africa, especially around ideas of a national democratic revolution as being a stage towards socialism 

####  Bibliography 
 - https://omalley.nelsonmandela.org/cis/omalley/OMalleyWeb/03lv02424/04lv02730/05lv03188/06lv03217.htm
 -  https://jacobin.com/2023/02/tom-lodge-red-road-to-freedom-review-south-african-communist-party-anti-apartheid